[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neo.com
I'm your host Dylan Grabowski in today's
episode we were joined by Kurt Hemer the
CEO of the Mina Foundation a public
benefit Foundation dedic at to
supporting the Mina protocol and the
growth of its ecosystem in this episode
we spoke about the evolution Arc of
information and money sharing protocols
from web zero or the pre- internet days
all the way through today and web 3
Kurt's time at Libra DM and the industry
demand for a stable coin the importance
of ZK technology and how it can provide
for privacy identity and scaling
Solutions the Mina ecosystems grow and
how Builders can begin building on the
Mina protocol interoperability solutions
that Mina's ZK technology can offer and
so much more just a reminder nothing
said on this podcast is a solicitation
to buy or sell any tokens and that
nothing should be taken as Financial
advice the host or guests May hold
tokens discussed in any given episode
and you can head over to neon.pdf
on your favorite podcasting platform
every interaction and a reply really
helps us get more eyes and ears on the
smart economy podcast so with all that
said I really enjoyed this conversation
with Kurt and I hope you enjoy it too
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we're joined by
Kurt Hemer the CEO of the Mina
Foundation The Entity tasked with
growing the ecosystem of the world's
lightest ZK blockchain how you doing
today Kurt I'm doing great Dylan thanks
for having me and also thanks to all of
your listeners for tuning in yeah I
think um maybe before we even jump into
the conversation just so there's no
conflict of interest or anything I've
actually been holding Mina for a long
time and have been very excited in the
ecosystem so this is a chat that um I
couldn't say no to when the opportunity
was presented so I'm very excited to to
talk with you today and kind of one of
the first things I want to like jump
into and and and hear your perspective
of is um if people are like me when they
first hear about zero knowledge
technology ZK technology the first thing
that kind of comes to the Forefront is
yeah this is privacy preserving
technology but Mina is deploying ZK Tech
in a way that empowers the blockchain in
in a completely different way which
we'll jump into so I kind of just want
to hear like what are the other use
cases what are the other uses for ZK
Tech and what are the ways that we can
think differently about zero knowledge
yeah great question Dylan and I think as
many listeners and as you probably know
up until now how ZK was very you know
mostly well known for scaling for
addressing issues around congestion and
costs notably with ethereum uh and and
there's been a lot of layer 2 Solutions
built that that do just that uh what me
has been focusing on is making that ZK
uh capability something that be can can
be programmable so applying it over any
kind of if you will any kind of data set
uh if you think across different kinds
of Industries Health Data financial data
news media artistic data and applying a
layer of you know people talk about
privacy and often times they confuse it
with anonymity and that's not what
privacy is it's really about selective
disclosure and deciding what you want to
share who you want to share it with and
and where and and when you want to to do
that and you know some some really
well-known examples and probably any
anybody working in ZK who you talk to
will talk about kyc right you don't want
to share your passport and all that
information um necessarily with all of
the different actors that you have to
interact with or even uh you know
required for onboarding with financial
institutions so it's very easy to create
a zero knowledge proof that attests that
you've been kyc but you can do that with
any data set really and create those
attestations uh and then just share the
attestation rather than the actual data
itself and again why is it so secure is
because it's in the name zero knowledge
there's nothing none of that data is
shared none of the data is even exposed
it's just I've made a statement the
statement is proven true but all of the
details for that statement are just not
shared so am I over 18 years of old I
can you know that statement is true but
you have no idea how old I am when my
birthday actually was um so I I can go
on but just pause there um let let me
know if you want me to go on Dylan or or
if you have any other questions or or
areas you want to direct the combo but I
can I can talk more about kind of the
direction that Mina is is going um with
with all of that oh we'll we'll
definitely be dragging out the the
direction of mina um throughout the
conversation and I think that's a great
starting point and you know a lot of
people can also take what you were just
saying um at at like the way that we can
relate it to the real world and not just
kind of like crypto and blockchain
enthusiasts is like when I go to the bar
and they check that I'm over 21 why does
the bouncer need to see my ID that has
my address on it you know that's a
potential attack vector and I think that
maybe folks who aren't in the crypto
space might not think as adversarially
as we do but this is like a perfect
example out in the real world of
everything you were just saying like we
should be able to attest that over 21
without somebody having to see you know
where I live and when I was born um
especially as we become more and more
digital that becomes an attack Vector in
a way that we can be so like have a
social engineering uh attack on you know
our data um the bank account information
we use all sorts of information like
that so yeah just really fun to kind of
like dive into the higher level of of
what ZK can offer um but before we like
delve into Mina and the work that the
Mina foundation's doing um I do just
kind of want to get like a sense of how
you ended up here um if you're like me
or so many others that we had on the pod
maybe you heard about like Bitcoin or
ethereum in 2012 2013 you're just like
oh that's cool and didn't look at it for
a few years later um so kind of what's
your Genesis when did you first hear
about crypto and then what was your aha
moment where you knew this is a place I
need to be building in yeah great qu
it's such an interesting question right
and everybody has their own particular
path so in in my case so I I come from
sort of a telecoms background and had
heard of Bitcoin pretty much on and when
the white paper came out and then 2009
and but no unfortunately I didn't buy it
when I was at 40 cents and hold on to it
I I didn't buy a you know a $6 million
Pizza either um but but just became
fascinated with it and then like many
folks sort of dabbled in in a bit of
speculation uh and and kind of looking
at space from that angle but then I I
took a big step towards it like as
somebody had come in um you know pretty
early on and also with a background I
had so I like I'm dating myself but I'm
like um I'm people talk about web 1 2
and three I'm like from web zero um well
like like you know I started working
when be before you know we read Gophers
which were like the the the web um
crawlers so so you know going from web
zero to web one to two and three and I
think everybody kind of knows right web
one was the static page phase web web 2
is making them more interactive and
collecting being able to collect more
data now web web 3 is moving that out of
the centralized uh big big Tech into the
hands of individuals themselves to
control their data but um you know from
from where I was it was like how how is
this technology going to become useful
like what can it be used for and my
background was actually telecoms and
payments I was working at PayPal as well
and so I was like okay Bitcoin it's it's
a you know a lot of debate is it a store
value is it a payment if it's store
value why do you want to pay for it I
think all those things are have been
actually pretty well well well well
addressed um so I won't delve into them
but anyway so at that time I was like
okay how how's this stuff going to be
easy to use because it it definitely
wasn't easy to use it's still not easy
to use and how can we bring it into
people's everyday lives and was kind of
in the right place at the right time
I've been in Geneva you can tell by the
accent initially not from Europe uh
initially from New Jersey actually but
I've been in Europe for 30 years and in
Geneva and I was in the right time of
the right place and so I became U part
of the initial team of the Libra
Association pretty much from the gecko
when it was from the day it was launched
uh June 19th in 2019 and then up until
you know the the the ending of of that
the change from Libra to DM the reason
why I got excited about that so first of
all yes it was Facebook back then a lot
of the initial thought leadership came
from really Powerhouse intellectual
engineering and product folks within
Facebook but it was a true Association
right there was um you know we had 21
members there was in addition to
Facebook you had Shopify Spotify Uber
Lyft and and and many more but you know
love those organizations or hate them
they know how to make services that
people want to use so I thought okay the
angle I'm coming at is this is an
association that has the power and the
ability to take this technology and
build experiences and services that
people will want to use and even things
like you know the the advertising model
is now kind of broken on the internet so
how do you make how do you make micro
payments work so that you can consume
and pay very small amounts for the
things that you're scrolling or looking
at um and and you know we there's still
a lot of we're not there yet right we're
we're but we're getting closer so anyway
so that's what attracted me to the space
and um but it was really interesting
Dylan because during that period right
the the the three years that I was with
that project like heads down on and and
I was sort of more behind the scen so I
wasn't one of the people that was
speaking publicly we had a lot of really
fantastic um policy folks but I was
still very much involved behind the
scenes and operationalizing a lot of the
things and you know was heads down on
getting the discussions going with
policy makers Regulators worldwide and
what is stable coins and what do you
know how does it impact cbdc and all
that he kind of missed what was
happening at that time with Defi and
ethereum all that's because all that
stuff was happening at the same time and
when when DM ended and it it really
actually came down to a discussion you
initially we started it in Switzerland
then it got moved to the US and then
ultimately it it kind of died a death on
on Capitol Hill because um this is
public knowledge it came to a discussion
between um Dron pal and and Jet yell
um but I I picked up my head and said
okay what are you going to do next and I
got introduced to you know I started
looking around zero knowledge that looks
like there's real utility here and just
a small parenthesis right because in
this space right you've got everything
you've got some real hardcore technology
that has a lot of value potential for
value and then you've got the schillers
the speculators the you know all that
stuff going on and we we you know the
industry is kind of keened itself out um
over the last couple of years so it's
really like what kind of Technology what
things where is a real utility and value
being created and so I stumbled across
zero knowledge and I saw okay this this
is valuable this is very valuable and
then I met was introduced to Evan
Shapiro who was one of the co-founders
the other co-founder was izy meckler um
met Evan and and I met some of the other
um team that have been here and I just
fell in love with the team here you had
super bright like the charts
intellectual horsepower coupled with
like a humility That You Don't See often
in this space and you know this this
very collaborative approach of of of
working and and I think that's kind of
become embedded in the way mean has been
built right which has been built to
scale um as well and yeah so I I you
know not really knowing much about ZK it
probably took me a month to be able to
pronounce succinct non-interactive
argument of knowledge you know the
acronym for ZK snark um uh so so it's
taken a while and I'm still learning
every day um anyway sorry that was super
longwinded but that's that's the that's
the the path I love it you nailed
actually like five of my questions with
that response so it was great and I
think um I don't want to like I think
when crypto came to the Forefront of
like the political sphere here in the US
I very much remember in 201 19 2020 when
Mark Zuckerberg was testifying in front
of Congress talking about the the stable
coin that Libra DM was working on and
just getting grilled and I can pinpoint
at that point in time that's when it
changed that's when crypto changed
that's when politicians started taking
it seriously we didn't quite necessarily
see any pro or anti- stances uh for a
few years later um but now in the US
it's it's at least the past couple years
it's been very adversarial um I actually
flew out with coinbase and stand with
crypto to chat with Colorado's elected
legislators about Pro crypto legislation
and the positives that this industry can
bring and the importance of keeping it
on Shore but I you know for better or
worse like I do think that it was kind
of an amazing inflection point that
Libra kind of and D DM forced on us that
this Tech is here to stay and if
politicians don't look at it then we are
going to have stable coins that are
backed by a basket of currencies and
commodities that will come and threaten
the dollar which is basically what I
think the politicians saw and that's
kind of when the the alarm Bell started
ringing for them so it's super cool that
you were working on that and you were
kind of gr Cradle to the Grave with it
as well um but you also touched on kind
of your G like the tenure you've had in
the the Cs space the Computer Sciences
space and I think it's fascinating to
have watched the evolution of web zero
to web 3 and where we're at today so I
think as we kind of like transition into
how you landed at at Mina in 2022 as the
as the COO and then what it was like to
kind of become the CEO um in December of
of last year um maybe before we do that
I just kind of want to hear from your
perspective like you've worked in
payments um you worked in Telecom these
are areas verticals that became very
empowered by the world becoming more
connected through peer-to-peer and
internet protocols um so maybe you have
some insights into what's kind of like
the thing that is surprised you the most
during your tenure and your career about
how these um communication protocols
have connected us like what are you
surprised about today in 2024 like holy
crap I can't believe we have that maybe
like Skype or something I don't know and
on the other side of the coin what did
you think when you first started your
career we would have today that we don't
have gosh um those are great questions
Dylan and and so first off like when I
first so when I first moved to
Switzerland right what we're doing now
was Unthinkable unless you were in a big
room with big television screens and I
was in a room and forget about the co
like the cost would have been like off
the charts and at that time there was a
thing called call back where if I wanted
to call you know my parents I would dial
you it was like cheaper to call from One
Direction or the other like forget about
like this free communication essentially
free over over the the the internet and
so you know really the internet
democratized the access to information
and what hasn't been democratized though
has been payments right um and then also
there's been you know the the initially
internet was afforded pretty free reign
in terms of Regulation that allowed it
to grow like you think about all the tax
breaks that that Amazon had and stuff
and it's normal that that countries
don't want to catch up with that because
those are important Revenue strapes
right um and uh but but it's also
important to let things just run for a
little while and develop to let them to
let them uh uh take off um so you know
and and even before that I was I I was
developing firmware and encryption
software so it's like that famous Steve
Jobs speech where you connect the dots
looking backwards like all these things
kind of I I don't think I could have
connected them um going going forward um
so and and now where we are on the cusp
of like AI right and I think pretty soon
in and here's where ZK and and what some
of the things Mina has developed become
really exciting because and I I said
this in another presentation I gave not
too long ago but AI is moving to the
edge and and what that means is AI is is
moving into our devices into our phones
our watches or glasses or appliances and
you know right now we've got this
friendly browser based AI interface but
but that's pretty soon that's going to
be a relic and it's moving into these
devices and that means that information
is going to be captured about us in ways
that we're not even thinking about now
so how do we you know this error that
we're moving into and and there's the
era of the internet of things but now
we're moving into this new era which
we're calling the the internet of true
things and what does that mean it means
having ZK proofs ZK apps embedded into
these applications and interfaces and
devices as we're using them that will
then provide us the control of our own
privacy that we want and and deserve so
um I I kind of want to jump in and and
maybe steer like the rest of your answer
I think one of the super interesting
ways that blockchain technology and AI
will co-mingle in the future is
verifying that indeed a piece of content
was created by a human um I write
articles uh multiple articles a week I
host these podcasts but we're starting
to see that deep fakes can become a real
thing and they're becoming very damn
good so how does kind of ZK enable
technology and maybe like identity how
do they combine in order to verify that
we're indeed reading real articles from
a human or listening to a podcast that
was created by a human and what are the
ways in which like we're not even
thinking that ZK and identity uh
combined with blockchain can kind of
like verify that the information I'm
consuming came from a human and not some
hallucination from Ani AI llm or
something like that yeah fantastic and
and I'm really excited because it's
exactly the kind of thing that's now
enabled on Mina and it's actually the
first ZK layer one to bring
programmability onto its main net so you
could have production commercialized
apps and one of those applications which
is starting to address the kind of thing
is is an application called puno which
is uh it's a voting application and it's
integrated it's actually built by this
really fantastic development team in
South Korea they've launched it there
it's it's integrated with caca talk
which is you know it's like the WhatsApp
of South Korea but it's also integrated
with telegram now and this is a voting
application also for either could be
used for series votes or also fun
mediatic votes uh as well but what what
it does is it it does two things it
combines the capab it has the capability
to combine kyc information of Voters
with social graph data so that it
combines the two to create an identity
and again using ZK all of that
information that a voter has shared your
own it's protected you're not sharing
the information it's the attestations
and then so so that protects the privacy
of the voters and as well as it it helps
ensure for the organizers of the vote
that you've got eligible voters
participating in that so it's really
combining ID plus this social aspect and
like that you're you're right this is
like one of the huge challenges I think
that is being faced now is how do we
prove humanity and I think it it's going
to require more than just technology to
do that and that's where the social
graph piece becomes really really um
interesting to to to to do that um
there's something else I was going to
say but it kind of slipped my mind but I
don't mind in here because um we were
talking before we hit the record button
about kind of our our ties to Colorado
and in
2018 um Colorado was one of the first
states to leverage blockchain for um
overseas uh deployed military personnel
to participate in local elections so
blockchain was leveraged so that folks
could actually like record onchain the
fact that they did indeed um submit a
vote for a local election here so it's
super cool to kind of hear you talk
about um identity and voting Solutions
and how this is starting to slowly be
rolled out in the Mina ecosystem um but
before we kind of like delve further
into the significance of having a
programmable ZK L1 um I am a little bit
curious to hear from the foundation's
perspective um how do you as an L1 an
ALT L1 um for any Trader who's listening
to this show how do you kind of like
deal with the onslaught of these ZK
enabled uh proofs on like ethereum l2s I
think we have something around like 50
evml 2s right now some of them are
optimistic proofs some of them are ZK
proofs but it kind of the two kind of
get co-mingled with like your quote
unquote Normie so what's like Mina
foundation's perspective on going out
there and differentiating yourself as a
programmable L1 where you can embed like
ZK enabled code into your smart contract
and into your ZK app or your dap for
someone who hasn't necessarily spent
some time in the Mina ecosystem and
what's kind of like the differentiating
factor with l2s and and are there any
like pros like pros and cons for having
like the the popularity of l2's rise and
kind of like bringing ZK to the
Forefront of your average blockchain
user yeah so you know the solutions are
fantastic right and and there's a real
need there and again eum was really the
first blockchain that created the
ability for smart contracts uh and and
that was like a huge step forward
because Bitcoin was not programmable and
had a lot of um um also security um
aspects or privacy excuse me more less
security more privacy related um
concerns but again as you're talking
about in the beginning that created
scaling issues congestion issues and
that's what these l2s are addressing but
they're not really addressing so much
the programmable aspect and and then
they also still have to settle back to
ethereum so Mina Mina is a little bit
ahead of its time but I think time will
I think I think its time will will will
come um ZK is a very noisy space now but
Mina is Mina was the first one or one of
the first ones and it's it's kind of got
a head start one of the things that I
think you you were aware of this and
mentioned it is very well known as being
the world's lightest blockchain when it
when it came out so even just maybe
backing up a second and the
for for you know many people know this
already but just so some of your
listeners might not why like why is ZK
so important what did Mina do that is so
fundamental well it when Mina blockchain
came out it it was fundamental it was
the the whole block the whole state of
the blockchain could be verified in a
matter of milliseconds and contained in
an instance of memory that's less than
22 kilobytes and Dylan that's like a
fundamental shift in computer design in
computer science because and and really
more I guess blockchain design or
blockchain science because until then if
you wanted to participate as a node and
a network in a blockchain benefit from
its security and consensus and
decentralization aspects you'd have to
reexecute every single transaction and
as time goes on the compute power
required to do that becomes enormous and
what eban and and Izzy and and Brandon
case who was one of the original
Engineers you know they create ated the
ability to have that state captured in
this small zero knowledge proof and the
the other thing so it's really baked in
from the ground up with with Mina and
the other thing that they implemented
which I I don't think any other ZK
ecosystem has or Community is this this
aspect of infinite recurent because as
time goes on you know so so the first
implementation of really the Mina system
was creating the proofs of the consensus
of the blockchain so you could r on the
security with that one lightweight
instance but it's constantly being
updated so now um so so just think of
interoperability right like the size of
that the whole size of that is so small
you could easily fit it into the smart
contract on another blockchain whether
it's ethereum or salana so that opens
the door for uh scalability and a lot of
interoperable features um the other
thing though now with what Nina has just
launched which is ZK programmability on
mainnet is you can now create those
proofs of anything of the what what
other a whatever data set you want to
use and also there's um this concept of
HTTP which we and and a couple of other
organizations in the industry like Zama
have been talking about but effectively
you know https was creating that that
secure connection between a browser and
a user's device now you can create a ZK
connection so you can create
attestations from data elements that you
have so you're not sharing again you're
not sharing that data with the Internet
or the the larger world but that um
attestation now what's wild about me
like this is mindblowing is these
attestations can be used interoperative
on the blockchain so let's say you want
to participate in a permissioned um Dex
on me well you can use uh identity and
kyc parameters or attestations have been
generated from other applications you've
used to provide to that so this creates
this interoperable sort of open database
of attestations where the attestations
can be shared but none of the data
itself is shared and this creates a new
level of interoperability and we you
know this is really the internet of of
true things and then it's it's backed by
this recursive zero knowledge proof
system that that Mina has has built from
the ground up so to to leverage the the
the zero knowledge proofs um and and
that programmability for much much more
than just scaling and rolling up um
other transactions and throwing them
back into a consensus State it's really
creating this interoperable ecosystem
and the the the underlying technology we
call it the proof of everything system
because you can literally because of
that recursion you could wrap everything
into it like you know they technically
it would take a while to do it but like
conceptually you could have the entire
web three like proven in in this small
proof um and and you know not just the
state but you get some account
information so so me is really different
and it's really interesting too like
there there's video clips of I I don't
remember exactly when it was it might
have been in at eth in in Boda a year or
two ago but the to buan was talking
about he was saying in 10 years you'll
have blockchain running in your browser
somebody already built that on Min
there's a proof of concept called open
Mina so it's running like you can run
Mina it can participate in the
blockchain from a browser that's
happening now so however let's call a
spade a spade like there is one
challenge we have it's a nonm chain
there's a large ecosystem that's been
built up in the evm world I think you
know it's still super early days in in
this space in this industry and I think
it it is a bit of a race for who's going
to build the most performant technology
and ultimately that's going to I think
runs out and I think Mina is set up for
with with a pretty big head start there
because it's it doesn't have to retrofit
all of these things into it it was built
and like there there's no way that the
blockchain world doesn't use ZK for now
and and for forever basically because
it's so fundamental in the scalability
and security um and decentralization
that it that it provides how we're
saying that we are working on um Bridges
to the ethereum world so you can use the
the whole proving system within Mina but
have it settled or actually um utilize
that within the ethereum world just last
week a partnership was announced between
Mina and this group called aligned layer
which are building a very efficient uh
and should be very inexpensive proof
aggregation system and Mina is going to
be part of that so that'll that'll bring
uh the capability for anyone in ethereum
ecosystem to now start using the the
Mina Zerona system as well you you
jumped ahead to one of my questions
about Alliance but I'm glad that that
you brought that up and as you were just
speaking like you also kind of um I
wouldn't say triggered me but like you
triggered a thought and I think maybe
two years ago if we could not have even
spoken about an a non-m blockchain kind
of coming to the Forefront but we're
seeing now with like salana being a top
five and managing to stay in the top
five now we're starting to hear people
talk about move VM and that is a
different uh virtual machine that can
compile code and this is something
that's completely different than evm I
myself have been working um beyond the
podcast day-to-day in the Neo ecosystem
and Neo has its own virtual machine and
basically the way that this ecosystem
has dealt with the um like overwhelming
use of evm was to build a side chain
that's evm compatible so it's like you
have to be able to connect to evm
ecosystems today or else you or else but
we're finally seeing like salana kind of
like shift that narrative so does this
kind of give hope to like what Mina is
doing as its own protocol does it kind
of give the the the team and the
community kind of like uh does it
Empower them to say Hey you know like
maybe we can keep doubling down on being
an ALT evm um and as you're saying like
you did partner with aligned there's
going to be evm compatibility so like I
guess maybe just to continue on what you
were just saying like does a project
necessarily have to become evm
compatible or are we moving and shifting
into a mindset where it's a pro but not
a necessary I I think it's I think
exactly Dylan I I I think I think it's a
pro particularly where we are today
because you know so and and also
actually I think not just EVN compatible
but also Bitcoin compatible right we're
we're also part of this L2 um ordinal uh
Consortium which is about bringing Zer
knowledge into Bitcoin like you know on
on the one hand you have the the
dreamers and The Visionaries and and
they know what the tech the perfect
technical like architectures and things
are but and and on the other hand you
have these you know existing ecosystems
and existing market and you know sort of
like you need a working commercial model
and activity to sustain philanthropy
right and and and and and and so you you
have kind of you should go to where the
the money is but you know I think what
we're doing is is you know we need to do
that we need to make it accessible and
we need to to um be part of that evm uh
ecosystem but you know I think many
folks have just gone there because it's
where the money is but they're not doing
anything different they're not thinking
differently and I I think that's where
you know Mina is building thinking
something different and you know we're
hoping people will start coming in to
the community and start building on the
protocol now and they already are right
there's already you know hundreds of
developers and and projects that are now
launching and we've got more and more uh
folks that are launching onto the main
net now that that CK program
programability there but I think
ultimately like why just become another
me2 L2 on ethereum when what we have is
so fundamentally different and and
ultimately and and again it's you have
to think about when and where and why
right because you know what what
problems today need a blockchain what
problems need zero knowledge proofs what
problems need both and sometimes they're
not needed right it's just uh so so so
let's not try to fit them where they're
where they're not needed and I think
it's interesting too I think
collectively as an industry we're all
coming around it's so funny this seems
to be really the year of the product
Market fit uh where where you know we're
saying well well okay there's some been
really some great use case there's defi
there's nfts um these are really cool
things but how do we get to a point
where it's baked into your everyday life
and you don't even know that you're that
you're using it and how can we really
bring the utility that's promised into
into the mainstream and we're getting
closer I'm not the only one saying this
right this seems to be a recurring theme
from a lot of the different uh events
that I that I've been at and also
drawing into the design world right like
let's let's stop saying this is what the
technology and the engineering can do
why don't we put that into a like start
with this the the design of the product
what is the you know and I I'm not
really an apple Fanboy or a Steve Jobs
Fanboy but right like he was so focused
on when you turn on that computer it's
got to be super quick um and then just
the air the graphics the font right and
just making really meaningful uh user
experiences and then figuring how to
make the engineering work to build those
rather than you know what we've ended up
today with these 12 or 24 um you know
seed word passphrases for your wallet
that you're never supposed to write down
but you're supposed to remember I mean
like it's not a great user experience
you kind of said the you kind of said
the dirty like words out loud that we
don't always need to implement
blockchain solutions for the product and
then even further like does ZK even need
need to be implemented so if you're just
kind of like throwing ZK enabled
blockchain it might just be buzzwords
you're trying to throw around and get
some some funding um but we don't need
to like highlight the the dirt of the
industry um like I mentioned at the
beginning of the recording I've been
hodling and and researching Ina for
years now and I kind of bought into the
super lightweight blockchain thesis um
like if you look at Celestia's kind of
like community marketing campaign over
the past year it was Celestia can run a
node on a Raspberry Pi or things like
this and earlier you were talking about
edge cases where AI is going to make it
to our browsers um and not just like in
browser like chat GPT like it will
become a part of our browsing Solutions
and it will become a part of Mobile and
so I think potentially like we can see
ZK enabled l1s kind of starting to like
Mina kind of starting to have like a
role on mobile devices or maybe like a
lightweight rooll on an in browser
application for as long as I've been um
in the Mina ecosystem as a as a hodler
and I've been proudly staking for two
and a half years now um kind of like the
long-term narrative was that we are
building the infrastructure for
applications to come but apps can't be
here yet because like the blockchain
isn't ready to support that sort of
programmability or functionality and and
when you take a peek at what's happening
in the Mina ecosystem now as you
mentioned earlier there are already
starting to be some ZK apps that are
launching on mainnet and there are other
builders that are building ZK apps so as
you go out and you try to grow the
ecosystem what are kind of maybe the
selling points or like as you're
speaking with dap and ZKA app developers
about why they should build on Mina when
you're having these conversations and
their ears perk up what is it now today
that is ATT AC in um an app builder a
web three app builder to instead of
building a daap on another blockchain to
exploring Mina and building their idea
as a ZK app on the Mina chain so it goes
back to what we're talking about before
Dylan is that there's just a higher
degree of possible interoperability
within the the Mina protocol ecosystem
and again so if you if you're running a
DEX uh right or a def5 protocols and you
want to make sure that you stay on the
right side of compliance but you also
want to stay on the right side of the
the web 3 um U you know privacy fos how
do you do that well by building on on
Mina you can rely on the other uh ZK
apps that have provided attestations for
for ZK kyc AML identity and you know
demand those attestations when people
interact with the application that
you've built so you're staying on the
right side of you know compliance and
issues you're respecting that web 3
ethos but and that's just one example
right but but basically the the the
point is this this open database if you
will of attestations that are also
privacy preserving and creating this
greater interoperability and if you
think about many ecosystems today which
are phed by different data silos and
this is you know so so that's one one
reason why and there's a lot that's
happening now on me there's the INF
there's certain things on the
infrastructure side uh two two main
product projects one called Proto kit
it's going to be Reed municate pretty
soon which is a sort app chain rollup
solution and another one called Zeo
which is what they call an isomorphic
rollup and these are both solutions that
allow TPS and scaling on Mina so if you
have to process a lot of transactions
within a short period of time those are
the the kinds of things you would want
as opposed to maybe if you just need one
settlement per day you know to layer one
is fine we just had announced an
agreement with Mar assets who are doing
just that they have a private blockchain
for securitized token offer um offerings
and they want to settle once a day on a
on a public blockchain and they're going
to use Mina to uh to do that and then
there's a number of there's a number of
applications that are already launching
and being worked on one two two
important ones though are um are it we
we we do have to have dexes and defi on
there because there's mean and Native
tokens people want to create uh uh you
know they need to create businesses and
projects so they'll that will be very
important Market places uh for them and
there's projects that are and companies
that are working on building those one
is called Lumina and another one is
called uh Cowan I think there's a third
one called Trident uh and then uh
there's some privacy preserving
applications again with compliance built
into it one is called Hakata which they
actually won a startup award at the
crypto Association Summit which was
earlier in June this year they also came
in second place at Davos so it's really
exciting to have those kinds of projects
building on top of me and then there's
been a bunch of things that are just
being launched by we we have such a uh
it's really interesting you get a lot of
very loyal community members in these
different ecosystems um you know I know
we're not the only ones with loyal
members but we have some really loyal
ones and they've built some great things
there's a game called tile Dill
developed by the ZK noid team there's a
um an nft Marketplace that's that's now
available on Mina as well but again I
think this sort of goes back to the
question before too like do you know ZM
a pro and and you know these aren't just
me toos these are these are these are
valid you know really interesting types
of projects that have done well in other
ecosystems but now they've got a ZK
flavor on them they're important to have
but what I'm excited about is the other
things that are get built and you know
it's interesting we we we you can always
sort of map out well what do we think
would be cool applications and there's a
lot of people thinking about what what
applications can be built but the other
the other thing I think about a lot
Dylan is if you think back when
microprocessors and chips were being
created they they knew they had to make
faster clock speeds condense the number
of circuits that you can get uh into
them bigger Ram make them more
performant they they knew some of the
applications were going to be used they
knew they were building those for
devices did they know that that Dylan
and Kurt would be talking separated by
thousands of miles on Wi-Fi on device on
video not the time right so so I think
you know there's also there's like the
curve of like applications that we know
that are going to be built and and do
well and then there's like what else is
going to be built and that I'm sorry I
know it's a bit long but there's
something you triggered before that I
wanted to mention too when you're
talking about my particular sort of uh
history and how I got here but biggest
inventions like almost happened by
accident and like for example SMS
messaging wasn't developed to be
peer-to-peer messaging it was just a
signaling channel that was available on
telecom's networks and somebody actually
discovered you could actually use it for
sending messages and then they started
doing that and it just kind of exploded
and if you think of other Industries
like those famous yellow sticky notes by
3M well the glue was just not strong
enough but it turned out to have have
have a use
um so you know some of these inventions
some of these things have sort of
happened by like accident or just having
the right elements in place at at the
right time and and so I think a lot of
times I tell tell you know my teams like
let's let's get comfortable in that
space of not always knowing what's going
to be developed next yeah it reminds me
of that Rumsfeld quote that has their
known knowns known unknowns unknown
knowns and then unknown unknowns
yeah I'm not sure we
want I know it's terrible person great
quote um but I I also appreciate that
you kind of bake into the calculus that
we don't know what will be created um
like a perfect example of this and
Beyond just SMS maybe for like your
everyday web user um Google Gmail was a
product that came out of the free time
that Google employees are given and it
was a mandate in the early 2000s that
80% % of a Google employees week was
spent on something that their manager
told them and then 20% of their week was
spent on them working on whatever they
wanted they had no guidelines no
directive anything and that's what GMail
was born out of and when you give people
the creativity to create and build we
don't know what can be built or will be
built because we haven't thought those
creative processes yet so I really
appreciate that you just kind of like
also acknowledge that and maybe even
though blockchain is like a 15-year-old
thing um we still don't know what like a
programmable ZK L1 layer can enable
because we just haven't had the 15 years
which in Tech uh or just in the grand
scheme of things isn't even that long to
begin with uh but we haven't even had
that yet with like Mina as a as a
programmable zk1 layer so I really
appreciated your response you just gave
because it was very empowering to the
devs and kind of like welcoming to devs
say hey come build here but also like
these block communities are so empowered
because this is the first time in
history that a tax stack has an economic
layer built into it and just for uh like
my own purposes like the reason why I've
been holding uh Mina for so long is
because I just stake it and and every
two weeks there's a new Epoch and I get
a little bit of Mina and St in return
for staking rewards so for the non-b
Builder just the the individual token
Enthusiast who's hearing about Mina for
the first time what's the role of the
token in staking and curing the network
and maybe you can also share why the
network opted to do these bonly epochs
where the rewards are distributed twice
a month as opposed to like once every
block or anything like that got it you
answered some of the the question within
the the the the the question itself um
and and some things actually I I I might
not know the answer to but uh you know
ultimately it's like every other proof
of stake Network it's all about securing
the network so thank you to you Dylan
very much for participating in the
security of the Network and um so it's
it's really the utility token and two
aspects of the token one is um that that
you know consensus mechanism and
ensuring the security of the network and
then the other thing it's used to pay
now for um for zero knowledge proofs uh
in in in the system so those are the two
aspects of the the token I I actually
it's a good question I can't speak to
the specific choice of the slot and and
Epic Times uh on the the the network um
there's something else I was gonna say
about that but it's it's kind of
slipping my mind at the moment maybe
maybe I could like feed in then because
uh you know being tasked at the
foundation level you know like token
holders and staking and like technical
designs isn't necessarily like on your
purview um so maybe like as we talk
about incentivizing dap Builders to come
build on Mina could you talk about maybe
some of like the gasless fees and folks
can pay minimal amounts of gas when
transacting on the network um yeah well
first of all because the computation for
the proofs are done uh off chain there's
there's there's just no gas fees uh
associated with that so uh you know it's
just the the transaction fee for sending
Mina back and forth and that's that's
really that's really low um right now
and and I think it it always will be um
but there's something ah it's bothering
me I'll I'll probably call you at 3:00
this morning Dylan when I when I
remember um what it was about the the EP
oh here here's here's also um just what
I wanted to mention how mean it is
different uh it's it's a permissionless
it's it's sort of occupies it this
Greenfield space of a permissionless
distributed system which uh there's a
great video that I encourage people to
watch that was just done a couple weeks
ago by one of the core protocol
Engineers Nathan Holland the o one ABS
which talks about that um so I won't go
too much into distributed permission
aspect but what's different about Mina
is there is no there's no um like when
you stake when you delegate your stake
you're not transferring custody of your
tokens so you can even if you stake them
somewhere else and it takes because of
the the slot times and the EPO times it
takes time for the staking ledger to be
updated and you know the the delegators
to get the the rewards coming back but
those tokens in your possession at all
time and you're free to sell that uh at
all time so you're actually not giving
away custody of your tokens and that's
different from other protocols where
there's bonding and you have to wait and
to to withdraw it so it's it's almost
like uh liquid staking exists built in
to the to the protocol and then of
course if you do you know if you do
decide to sell or do something else with
your tokens the until that's updated and
the staking Ledger that at EPO Tom
expires you still get the rewards back
and and that's a pretty different design
as well too which I think is pretty cool
yeah when I when I first bought my Mina
and started staking it was a a point of
uh it was like a dichotomy I was both
frustrated but also appreciated kind of
like the two we weight period And so um
I I I couldn't wait until two weeks
after to the moment after I staked to
start seeing my Mina come in so for like
token holders out there um it is
definitely uh you're not going to get
locked into like a 21-day unbonding
period like you might in the cosmos
ecosystem but also it's not like
ethereum where you have to buy a whole
new token like in stake eth to start
earning yield on it so definitely take a
peek at uh the Mina token if you're
interested in in being a Staker um kind
of zooming out I think and and wrapping
up uh one of the tasks of a foundation
is to like onboard new devs and new
projects and um I was speaking with Meg
listi she works over at gitcoin and we
were talking about the importance of
Grants and how grants can be an
empowering tool for onboarding devs in a
way that like alone or something like
this might not so I do want to just kind
of pick your brain about ZK ignite and
maybe hear a little bit about how uh
that as a grant entity or organization
uh is maybe similar or different to
other types of Grant programs and other
ecosystems sure just one second so we
actually have um kind of three different
Grant programs now ZK night is is is one
um which has been doing well it runs in
a period of we call cohorts which tend
to be 12we uh windows and CK ignite is
is now um in its the fourth core is
going to be starting in August and it's
it's really focused on projects that
have a go to market potential and some
some real usability based to it it's
pretty competitive uh and there's it's a
community commity Le initiative so the
uh viability the evaluations are done by
Community teams and and electors for the
the grants and then there's um another
program which is like if you will it's
like a ongoing rolling hackathon called
Navigators where you're just encouraged
to get your feet wet uh start um
developing some trying things out
pushing things out to to GitHub there
there's actually some more branches of
Navigators which we're going to be
launching pretty soon for different
types of developers and scouting and
bringing different people into the
ecosystem and then there's four grants
which is really rfps issued by the some
of the um engineering and protocol teams
within the community whether it's from
from the foundation itself or or o one
labs and these are for infrastructure
improvements that will basically public
goods that can be used by by anyone and
those are you know it's like a classic
RFP system where individuals and
projects and companies can respond to
those and prop you know make proposals
and some more being done there there's
integration actually going on now with
uh a group called geometry is
integrating with with celesa that's
that's one of those uh grants other um
uh core protocol grants are around uh
integrating different Oracle solution
providers so so any so there are three
Grant programs and you know I where we
try to differentiate ourselves one is
it's uh is ZK is hard we try to make it
as easy as possible we've done that by
using typescript uh programming language
developed by o1 called o 1js the Proto
kit uh I should start saying Minit
framework is a really easy development
environment that also makes it easy for
people to incorporate zero knowledge so
we're making that easier and then just
trying to be smart about it like we've
all seen uh you know the grant Hunters
people that just come from ecosystem to
ecosystem and cut and pce the same thing
and so we're we're you know we're trying
to just be really mindful about the
developers that are coming in who we're
working with making sure that they're
really committed you know to developing
on on the stack and the technology and
then we've implemented a lot to actually
track and help folks come through so uh
for example in the last coort uh that we
had like 24 out of 26 projects actually
delivered their milestones and if
they're not delivering the Milestones um
they're not getting the the grants that
that's that's kind of a hard thing about
this space right because like mean
Foundation now is going on three years
and many other foundations right the
whole Space isn't that old it's a tough
It's a non- forgiving space communities
expect everything to be working
perfectly from from day one and you know
it does take a bit to get these programs
implemented and and rolled out I'm not
just saying about Mina but like any
um whether it's web 3 uh Foundation or
uh you know even even with ethereum like
it takes a while to get these things
rolled out and running and so we're
we're now on on year two of some of
these programs and really they're
getting just going from strength to
strength uh and and also we we try to
benefit from learnings from some of the
other folks that cut their their teeth
early on yeah I'm part of a community
funding da and can very much speak to
the adversity that comes with the having
funding distribute and then also dealing
with the copy pasta kind of Grant
hunters and um you really want to walk a
fine line of of finding you know a
viable project um that can bring value
to the ecosystem but also you know not
just throw money into an ocean for a
team that wants to build something
that's a gargantuan task but you know
how far can can a small Grant really get
them um so it's it's an unenviable
position but it's unfortunately
necessary evil so um just to be quickly
on but the other thing we do too um of
course I don't think we're the only ones
but we also help provide introductions
there's different incubator programs
that work with us um out uh outlier
Ventures for example I was worked with
us and then some of our projects have
gone on to receive funding um there's
been investments into Zea which is
infrastructure project I mentioned uh
before um also Lumina decks got uh some
Investments and so there's more and more
kind of interesting right a lot of the
VC money pivoted to a just AI for a
moment but now there does seem to be
interesting amounts coming back into
into crypto and I think we're finding
more and more of that is coming into ZK
and the Mina protocol Community as well
I think VCS get like a bad RP in the
blockchain space um especially because
Community token holders feel like they
get dumped on but for an ecosystem to
grow and Thrive having a VC pipeline is
so important and it's actually really
cool that a few of your grantees have
gone on to to get funding and to
continue building um you know I think
that there's a lot of positives that can
come from that and maybe folks who
naysay the VCS uh should take a step
back and kind of evaluate the positive
externalities that they can bring to an
ecosystem so that's really cool but Kurt
I mean we're running up at the top of an
hour uh I know you're a busy guy um so
maybe we can just end the Pod with
anyone who's listened to this um who's a
builder or just like an interested
ecosystem tanker what's the best way
that they can contact either the Mina
Foundation or you directly so definitely
you should go to Docs
dos. mocol
follower out of me if I'm not already
following you um but Kur thank you so
much for coming on to the smart economy
podcast today to chat with us about Mina
foundation and the Mina ecosystem uh
like I said uh I'm a long-term hodler so
I was really excited to to see your name
come across my desk and um it was just
really great chatting with you um about
you know the lessons you've learned over
your tenure in the Computer Sciences
space uh Libra DM how you ended up in
the kind of GK realm and just the value
that you think this technology is going
to bring the world um it was just a
great and enlightening conversation so
thank you for your time I enjoyed it
thank you so much St cheers well what
did you think of that conversation I
thought it was fascinating to hear
Kurt's Arc throughout his career and the
growth of Technology as a medium for
connecting people across the globe but
also the links that we still have to go
in order to empower people through
Payment Solutions it was also really
cool to learn more about the power that
Mina's ZK technology can offer in terms
of cross-chain interoperability with
things like proof attestations and it
was just great to hear more about the
teams that are starting to build ZK apps
in the Mina ecosystem and the
opportunities for growth that these
teams have with VCS imp post Grant
building and funding to keep up to date
with the smart economy podcast head over
to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing your
support by r and reviewing this episode
on your favorite podcasting platform
once again every rate review comment and
like really helps us get the pod in
front of more ears and eyes and of
course if you're a Neo token holder
please consider voting for Neo news
today as your Council representative we
have proudly been serving the Neo
ecosystem since 2017 and we'll continue
to do so by putting portions of our
Council rewards directly back into
ecosystem growth initiatives so with all
that said I want to thank you so much
for taking the time to listen to the
smart economy podcast and we look
forward to catching you on the next
episode